README.md, before:

# Send Email from a custom HTML Form using Google Apps Script!!

A ***Step-by-Step Example*** of using an **HTML Form** to send a "Contact Us" Message via Email  using a Google Script - Free tool - No hosting, PHP, Python, Ruby, Java, Node.js etc.

This tutorial has been *forked* from an [existing tutorial by @dwyl & team](https://github.com/dwyl/html-form-send-email-via-google-script-without-server) with contributions by Sean McKenna. Thanks for sharing!

> ***Important:*** This solution publishes a form as a Google Apps Script Webapp. Webapps currently ***cannot*** be embedded in other webpages other than on Google Sites. 

## Why?

We needed a way of sending an email from from a "*static*" HTML page
when you don't have a web hosting server.

### *Key Advantages*

+ No web hosting to Deploy/Maintain/Pay for
+ ***Fully Customisabe*** - every aspect is customisable!
+ Email *sent via* ***Google Mail*** which is ***Whitelisted Everywhere*** (*high deliverability success*)
+ **Collect/Store** any **form data** in a ***Spreadsheet*** for easy viewing  
(*perfect if you need to share it with non-technical people*)

## What?

Instead of using a server to send your email,
which is *easy* but requires *maintenance*,  
use Google to send mail on your behalf
and use Google Spreadsheets to keep track of the data!

> You *could* use a "*free*" service like http://formspree.io/ to process your form submissions
if you don't care where you are sending your data and want to manage the data submitted  
in your email inbox (*messy ... yuck*!)  
*Or*... you can *invest* a few minutes and keep data private/manageable.
*Take your pick*.

## *How*?

### 1. Make a Copy of the Sample Spreadsheet

> Sample: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kbd8CXZk-hCkdEXsQE70t7AnKYZ-uiLrOaZHrx8gZcE/copy


This should give you something like this:

![2-copy-of-sheet](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10559710/3aec92f0-74ef-11e5-9295-f1988a23257b.png)

> Note: Feel free to change the name of the Copy to anything you want,
it will not affect the outcome.

### 2. Open the Script Editor

Open the **Script editor...** by clicking "**Tools**" > "**Script editor...**"

![2 script-editor](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10559732/8db2b9f6-74ef-11e5-8bf2-de286f079929.png)

Here's a *snapshot* of the script you need (*at this point in the exercise*): [script.gs](https://github.com/mhawksey/html-form-send-email-via-google-script-without-server/blob/master/script.gs)

### 3. Set the `TO_ADDRESS` in the Script

In the editor window you should expect to see:

![3-script-editor-showing-script](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560379/9efa5b3a-7501-11e5-96ba-a9e3b2d77ee4.png)

Change the value of the `TO_ADDRESS` to which ever email you want to receive
the contact form message.


### 4. Create your *basic* HTML Form

Using the template in `index.html` in the Script Editor,
create your own html file with the basic form. (*save the file*)

### 5. Save a *New Version* of your Script

It's not immediately *obvious* but you have to *click* on "*Manage Versions...*"

![19 google-script-no-save-new-version](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558249/527f3c98-74c1-11e5-8290-5af7fa7f5f75.png)

Then *create* your new version:

![20 google-script-save-new-version](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558250/53d21d5e-74c1-11e5-88c5-7bc2d8ce6228.png)

### 6. Publish the *Updated* Script as a Web App

![20 a-publish](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558288/50980aa8-74c2-11e5-8576-72084a564779.png)

Select the *latest* project version to deploy:

![21 deploy-new-version](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558251/570a5428-74c1-11e5-8ced-5dd26d3de3c4.png)

### 7. Authorize the Script to Send Emails

![5 auth-required](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560412/89d3fb0c-7502-11e5-81ce-fb239bf545b2.png)

![5-allow-sending-emails](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560416/a86a26ae-7502-11e5-9add-d5081d409af4.png)

![22 1-deploy-as-web-app](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558255/6eec31e2-74c1-11e5-9c07-cea6209526df.png)

Open the Current web app url into a new browser tab.
Then Click "OK".


### 8. Open the HTML Form (*page*) in your Browser

Fill in some sample data in the HTML Form:

![html form](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560494/674b64c4-7504-11e5-801a-b537d276f671.png)

Submit the form. You should see a confirmation that it was sent:


### 9. Check the email inbox for the address you set

Open the inbox for the email address you set in **Step 3** (*above*)

![email received](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560512/f87f1652-7504-11e5-8b0f-c342c395a193.png)


> ***Done***. That's it. You just created an HTML form that sends email!

# *Part Two - Make It Look Good* ...

We are going to keep this ***Super Lean*** by using [**PURE CSS**](http://purecss.io/start/)
for our Style (*fix the "ugly" HTML Form in step 8*).
And `submit` the form using [**Google Apps Script** ***Client-to-Server Communication***](https://developers.google.com/apps-script/guides/html/communication) to keep the person
on your page/site (*avoid "ugly" response page*)

### 10. Submit the Form using **Google Apps Script** "***Client-to-Server Communication***"

To *prevent* the page from changing when submitted the index.html file includes a `preventFormSubmit` function.

Update your `index.html` to include the following JavaScript file in the *`<head>`* of your file

    <script>
      // from https://developers.google.com/apps-script/guides/html/communication#forms
      // Prevent forms from submitting.
      function preventFormSubmit() {
        var forms = document.querySelectorAll('form');
        for (var i = 0; i < forms.length; i++) {
          forms[i].addEventListener('submit', function(event) {
            event.preventDefault();
          });
        }
      }
      window.addEventListener('load', preventFormSubmit);


      function handleFormSubmit(formObject) {
        google.script.run.withSuccessHandler(displayResult).record_data(formObject);
      }
      function displayResult(e) {
        console.log(e);
        document.getElementById('thankyou_message').style.display = 'block';
        document.getElementById('gform').style.display = 'none';
      }
      <script>

Now when the form is submitted the form data is sent to our `record_data()` function in the `script.gs` file. When it finishes the `displayResult()` hides the form and will now display a "Thank You" *message* when the form is submitted:

![thankyou message](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10561147/4086a89a-7517-11e5-840d-7f490353e225.png)

Keeps the person on the same page. No refresh.

### 11. Customise the  Message Shown when Form Submitted

Taylor your message by editing the `thankyou_message` div:

![10-customise-the-thankyou-message](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10561213/9e6d3342-7518-11e5-9860-43a268102de2.png)


### 12. Use CSS to Make the Form *Look Good*

For `this` *example* we are using ***Pure CSS***: http://purecss.io/start/
because its ***light weight*** (***4.0KB minified and gzipped***)
and *solves* our current "*problem*": Making it Look Good.

![PureCSS-Logo-Intro](https://github-cloud.s3.amazonaws.com/assets/194400/10565838/72d6d52a-75d2-11e5-9b92-ca02b1124920.png)

![PureCSS-module-sizes](https://github-cloud.s3.amazonaws.com/assets/194400/10565844/8f4885a0-75d2-11e5-9490-e3fc42c32616.png)

Without spending *too much* time on this, we can make the form *look*
***a lot*** nicer:

![contact form with pure css](https://github-cloud.s3.amazonaws.com/assets/194400/10566392/f38bc454-75dd-11e5-85dd-6819494a98f2.png)


# *Part Three - Store Submitted Contact Form Data in a Spreadsheet*

Sending the form data directly to your email inbox is a *good*
first step, but we can do better.

### 13. Add the `record_data` Function to your Google Apps Script

![record_data example](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10581613/8b4f9ad4-767b-11e5-90cc-962a9d6acc91.png)

This will record the data received from the form submission as a *row* in the spreadsheet.  
See: [script.gs](https://github.com/mhawksey/html-form-send-email-via-google-script-without-server/blob/master/script.gs) for the full code you can *copy-paste*.


### 14. Run the Setup Script

The Setup Script gets the Name of your associated Google Spreadsheet
so it knows where to put the data...

![12 7-run-setup-function](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10540765/e5da721a-7402-11e5-822a-0589c713cb47.png)

### 15. Save a New Version and Re-Publish it

Follow Steps 4, 5 & 6 to save a new version and ***re-publish*** the script.

### 16. Re-Test Submitting the Form

![submit the form](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10582654/cf3081e6-7680-11e5-9fd1-b989a8ba0b65.png)

### 17 Confirm the Data was Inserted into the Spreadsheet

![17-confirm-data-inserted](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10582676/eb8af5d8-7680-11e5-92bb-30dd08d2d7b3.png)


## Add your own fields!

In response to [Henry Beary's request](https://github.com/dwyl/html-form-send-email-via-google-script-without-server/issues/9)
we made the form handler *generic* which means you can now add any fields you want to the form.

remember to include the fields *inside* the form that has the id `gform`
and ensure that the `name` of the form element matches the new column heading in your spreadsheet.
e.g:
```HTML
<fieldset class="pure-group">
  <label for="color">Favourite Color: </label>
  <input id="color" name="color" placeholder="green" />
</fieldset>
```
This will allow you to capture the person's favourite color:
e.g:
![new-field-contains-data](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/11547132/9f162f6a-9949-11e5-89ac-aeb91e025844.png)

Let us know if you have any questions!


## Background Reading

+ Google Apps Scripts Basics: https://developers.google.com/apps-script/articles
+ Logger (like console.log):
https://developers.google.com/apps-script/reference/base/logger
+ Simple Mail Merge using Google Spreadsheets:
https://developers.google.com/apps-script/articles/mail_merge
+ Original Tutorial: AJAX post to google spreadsheet: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/10000020/ajax-post-to-google-spreadsheet which points to:
  + https://mashe.hawksey.info/2011/10/google-spreadsheets-as-a-database-insert-with-apps-script-form-postget-submit-method/

Commit message:

Added option to allow iframe

README.md, after:

# Send Email from a custom HTML Form using Google Apps Script!!

A ***Step-by-Step Example*** of using an **HTML Form** to send a "Contact Us" Message via Email  using a Google Script - Free tool - No hosting, PHP, Python, Ruby, Java, Node.js etc.

This tutorial has been *forked* from an [existing tutorial by @dwyl & team](https://github.com/dwyl/html-form-send-email-via-google-script-without-server) with contributions by Sean McKenna. Thanks for sharing!

> ***Important:*** This solution publishes a form as a Google Apps Script Webapp. Webapps currently ***cannot*** be embedded in other webpages other than on Google Sites. 

> ***Update:*** There is an undocumented option to permit Webapps to be embedded as `<iframe>` by using `setXFrameOptionsMode()`. To use uncomment `.setXFrameOptionsMode(HtmlService.XFrameOptionsMode.ALLOWALL)` in script.gs.

## Why?

We needed a way of sending an email from from a "*static*" HTML page
when you don't have a web hosting server.

### *Key Advantages*

+ No web hosting to Deploy/Maintain/Pay for
+ ***Fully Customisabe*** - every aspect is customisable!
+ Email *sent via* ***Google Mail*** which is ***Whitelisted Everywhere*** (*high deliverability success*)
+ **Collect/Store** any **form data** in a ***Spreadsheet*** for easy viewing  
(*perfect if you need to share it with non-technical people*)

## What?

Instead of using a server to send your email,
which is *easy* but requires *maintenance*,  
use Google to send mail on your behalf
and use Google Spreadsheets to keep track of the data!

> You *could* use a "*free*" service like http://formspree.io/ to process your form submissions
if you don't care where you are sending your data and want to manage the data submitted  
in your email inbox (*messy ... yuck*!)  
*Or*... you can *invest* a few minutes and keep data private/manageable.
*Take your pick*.

## *How*?

### 1. Make a Copy of the Sample Spreadsheet

> Sample: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kbd8CXZk-hCkdEXsQE70t7AnKYZ-uiLrOaZHrx8gZcE/copy


This should give you something like this:

![2-copy-of-sheet](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10559710/3aec92f0-74ef-11e5-9295-f1988a23257b.png)

> Note: Feel free to change the name of the Copy to anything you want,
it will not affect the outcome.

### 2. Open the Script Editor

Open the **Script editor...** by clicking "**Tools**" > "**Script editor...**"

![2 script-editor](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10559732/8db2b9f6-74ef-11e5-8bf2-de286f079929.png)

Here's a *snapshot* of the script you need (*at this point in the exercise*): [script.gs](https://github.com/mhawksey/html-form-send-email-via-google-script-without-server/blob/master/script.gs)

### 3. Set the `TO_ADDRESS` in the Script

In the editor window you should expect to see:

![3-script-editor-showing-script](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560379/9efa5b3a-7501-11e5-96ba-a9e3b2d77ee4.png)

Change the value of the `TO_ADDRESS` to which ever email you want to receive
the contact form message.


### 4. Create your *basic* HTML Form

Using the template in `index.html` in the Script Editor,
create your own html file with the basic form. (*save the file*)

### 5. Save a *New Version* of your Script

It's not immediately *obvious* but you have to *click* on "*Manage Versions...*"

![19 google-script-no-save-new-version](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558249/527f3c98-74c1-11e5-8290-5af7fa7f5f75.png)

Then *create* your new version:

![20 google-script-save-new-version](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558250/53d21d5e-74c1-11e5-88c5-7bc2d8ce6228.png)

### 6. Publish the *Updated* Script as a Web App

![20 a-publish](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558288/50980aa8-74c2-11e5-8576-72084a564779.png)

Select the *latest* project version to deploy:

![21 deploy-new-version](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558251/570a5428-74c1-11e5-8ced-5dd26d3de3c4.png)

### 7. Authorize the Script to Send Emails

![5 auth-required](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560412/89d3fb0c-7502-11e5-81ce-fb239bf545b2.png)

![5-allow-sending-emails](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560416/a86a26ae-7502-11e5-9add-d5081d409af4.png)

![22 1-deploy-as-web-app](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10558255/6eec31e2-74c1-11e5-9c07-cea6209526df.png)

Open the Current web app url into a new browser tab.
Then Click "OK".


### 8. Open the HTML Form (*page*) in your Browser

Fill in some sample data in the HTML Form:

![html form](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560494/674b64c4-7504-11e5-801a-b537d276f671.png)

Submit the form. You should see a confirmation that it was sent:


### 9. Check the email inbox for the address you set

Open the inbox for the email address you set in **Step 3** (*above*)

![email received](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10560512/f87f1652-7504-11e5-8b0f-c342c395a193.png)


> ***Done***. That's it. You just created an HTML form that sends email!

# *Part Two - Make It Look Good* ...

We are going to keep this ***Super Lean*** by using [**PURE CSS**](http://purecss.io/start/)
for our Style (*fix the "ugly" HTML Form in step 8*).
And `submit` the form using [**Google Apps Script** ***Client-to-Server Communication***](https://developers.google.com/apps-script/guides/html/communication) to keep the person
on your page/site (*avoid "ugly" response page*)

### 10. Submit the Form using **Google Apps Script** "***Client-to-Server Communication***"

To *prevent* the page from changing when submitted the index.html file includes a `preventFormSubmit` function.

Update your `index.html` to include the following JavaScript file in the *`<head>`* of your file

    <script>
      // from https://developers.google.com/apps-script/guides/html/communication#forms
      // Prevent forms from submitting.
      function preventFormSubmit() {
        var forms = document.querySelectorAll('form');
        for (var i = 0; i < forms.length; i++) {
          forms[i].addEventListener('submit', function(event) {
            event.preventDefault();
          });
        }
      }
      window.addEventListener('load', preventFormSubmit);


      function handleFormSubmit(formObject) {
        google.script.run.withSuccessHandler(displayResult).record_data(formObject);
      }
      function displayResult(e) {
        console.log(e);
        document.getElementById('thankyou_message').style.display = 'block';
        document.getElementById('gform').style.display = 'none';
      }
      <script>

Now when the form is submitted the form data is sent to our `record_data()` function in the `script.gs` file. When it finishes the `displayResult()` hides the form and will now display a "Thank You" *message* when the form is submitted:

![thankyou message](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10561147/4086a89a-7517-11e5-840d-7f490353e225.png)

Keeps the person on the same page. No refresh.

### 11. Customise the  Message Shown when Form Submitted

Taylor your message by editing the `thankyou_message` div:

![10-customise-the-thankyou-message](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10561213/9e6d3342-7518-11e5-9860-43a268102de2.png)


### 12. Use CSS to Make the Form *Look Good*

For `this` *example* we are using ***Pure CSS***: http://purecss.io/start/
because its ***light weight*** (***4.0KB minified and gzipped***)
and *solves* our current "*problem*": Making it Look Good.

![PureCSS-Logo-Intro](https://github-cloud.s3.amazonaws.com/assets/194400/10565838/72d6d52a-75d2-11e5-9b92-ca02b1124920.png)

![PureCSS-module-sizes](https://github-cloud.s3.amazonaws.com/assets/194400/10565844/8f4885a0-75d2-11e5-9490-e3fc42c32616.png)

Without spending *too much* time on this, we can make the form *look*
***a lot*** nicer:

![contact form with pure css](https://github-cloud.s3.amazonaws.com/assets/194400/10566392/f38bc454-75dd-11e5-85dd-6819494a98f2.png)


# *Part Three - Store Submitted Contact Form Data in a Spreadsheet*

Sending the form data directly to your email inbox is a *good*
first step, but we can do better.

### 13. Add the `record_data` Function to your Google Apps Script

![record_data example](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10581613/8b4f9ad4-767b-11e5-90cc-962a9d6acc91.png)

This will record the data received from the form submission as a *row* in the spreadsheet.  
See: [script.gs](https://github.com/mhawksey/html-form-send-email-via-google-script-without-server/blob/master/script.gs) for the full code you can *copy-paste*.


### 14. Run the Setup Script

The Setup Script gets the Name of your associated Google Spreadsheet
so it knows where to put the data...

![12 7-run-setup-function](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10540765/e5da721a-7402-11e5-822a-0589c713cb47.png)

### 15. Save a New Version and Re-Publish it

Follow Steps 4, 5 & 6 to save a new version and ***re-publish*** the script.

### 16. Re-Test Submitting the Form

![submit the form](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10582654/cf3081e6-7680-11e5-9fd1-b989a8ba0b65.png)

### 17 Confirm the Data was Inserted into the Spreadsheet

![17-confirm-data-inserted](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/10582676/eb8af5d8-7680-11e5-92bb-30dd08d2d7b3.png)


## Add your own fields!

In response to [Henry Beary's request](https://github.com/dwyl/html-form-send-email-via-google-script-without-server/issues/9)
we made the form handler *generic* which means you can now add any fields you want to the form.

remember to include the fields *inside* the form that has the id `gform`
and ensure that the `name` of the form element matches the new column heading in your spreadsheet.
e.g:
```HTML
<fieldset class="pure-group">
  <label for="color">Favourite Color: </label>
  <input id="color" name="color" placeholder="green" />
</fieldset>
```
This will allow you to capture the person's favourite color:
e.g:
![new-field-contains-data](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/194400/11547132/9f162f6a-9949-11e5-89ac-aeb91e025844.png)

Let us know if you have any questions!


## Background Reading

+ Google Apps Scripts Basics: https://developers.google.com/apps-script/articles
+ Logger (like console.log):
https://developers.google.com/apps-script/reference/base/logger
+ Simple Mail Merge using Google Spreadsheets:
https://developers.google.com/apps-script/articles/mail_merge
+ Original Tutorial: AJAX post to google spreadsheet: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/10000020/ajax-post-to-google-spreadsheet which points to:
  + https://mashe.hawksey.info/2011/10/google-spreadsheets-as-a-database-insert-with-apps-script-form-postget-submit-method/
